Modules Included with Eggdrop

The following modules are included with Eggdrop 1.10.1 and compiled via
the Meson build system:

  mod.assoc mod.blowfish mod.channels mod.compress mod.console mod.ctcp
  mod.dns mod.filesys mod.ident mod.irc mod.notes mod.pbkdf2 mod.python
  mod.seen mod.server mod.share mod.transfer mod.twitch mod.uptime
  mod.woobie

MODULE DESCRIPTIONS

ASSOC

  This module provides assoc support, naming channels on the botnet.

BLOWFISH

  Deprecated for password hashing (use pbkdf2 instead). Still required
  for encrypting/decrypting strings in Tcl scripts and legacy userfile
  migration. See mod.pbkdf2 for details on password hashing.

CHANNELS

  Provides channel-related support. Essential for joining channels and
  managing channel-specific userfile information. Supports CIDR ban
  notation for advanced ban management.

COMPRESS

  Provides file compression support for userfile transfers, reducing
  bandwidth during botnet sharing. Requires the share module.

CONSOLE

  Stores console settings when exiting the bot or using the .store
  partyline command. Allows persistent session state across restarts.

CTCP

  Provides standard CTCP replies. Required for CTCP CHAT functionality.

DNS

  Provides asynchronous DNS resolution to prevent the bot from hanging
  during hostname lookups. Supports DNS-over-TLS (DoT) for encrypted
  queries to modern DNS resolvers.

FILESYS

  Enables a file transfer subsystem where users can store and manage
  files. Makes the bot usable as a file server. Requires the transfer
  module.

IDENT

  Adds support for the oidentd service or allows Eggdrop to act as its
  own ident daemon for RFC 1413 compliance. See mod.ident documentation
  for setup details.

IRC

  Provides core IRC interaction and channel management. Essential for
  IRC connectivity. Requires server and channels modules.

NOTES

  Provides persistent note storage between users. Supports asynchronous
  notifications and message forwarding between bots.

PBKDF2

  Modern password hashing module using PBKDF2-SHA256/384/512. Required
  for new bots; new userfiles should use pbkdf2 exclusively. Can be
  loaded with blowfish for seamless migration from older versions.

PYTHON

  Adds a Python interpreter to Eggdrop. Requires Python 3.8+ development
  libraries. Can be used as the sole scripting engine (Tcl is optional).
  Includes eggtools.py for modern decorator-based event binding.

SEEN

  Provides basic seen commands via message or DCC. Works only for users
  in the bot's userlist. For advanced seen functionality, consider the
  gseen module (https://github.com/michaelortmann/gseen.mod).

SERVER

  Provides core server connectivity. Essential for IRC connections.

SHARE

  Enables userfile sharing between two directly-linked bots. Supports
  resynchronization buffers to minimize transfer overhead during
  reconnection.

TRANSFER

  Provides DCC SEND/GET support and userfile transfer functionality for
  botnet sharing. Supports turbo-DCC for optimized transfers.

TWITCH

  Adds connectivity with the Twitch gaming platform via its IRC-like
  gateway. Provides Twitch-specific event binds and moderator/VIP
  tracking. See mod.twitch documentation for limitations and setup.

UPTIME

  Reports uptime statistics to https://www.eggheads.org/uptime for
  public uptime tracking. See documentation for privacy information on
  what data is sent.

WOOBIE

  Demonstrative module intended as a starting point for new module
  developers. Contains minimal functionality but serves as a template.

BUILDING MODULES

Modules are built as shared objects (.so files) by the Meson build
system and loaded at runtime via loadmodule directives in the TOML
configuration file.

To build Eggdrop with all included modules:

    meson setup builddir/
    ninja -C builddir/

For information on writing custom modules, see doc/modules/writing-modules.

Copyright (C) 1999 - 2025 Eggheads Development Team
