IRCv3 Support

IRCv3 Support in Eggdrop

  This document provides information about IRCv3 capabilities supported
  by Eggdrop. IRCv3 is a set of standards defined by the IRCv3 working
  group (https://ircv3.net/). Support for these specifications was added
  starting with Eggdrop 1.9.0, with more capabilities added in
  subsequent versions.

ABOUT IRCv3

  As IRC servers began developing their own protocol extensions beyond
  the basic RFC 1459/2812 standard, server and client developers created
  the IRCv3 working group to document and standardize these features.
  IRCv3 specifications are designed to be backward compatible and are
  typically implemented via CAP (capability) requests sent during IRC
  session initialization.

  Clients can optionally request additional IRCv3 capabilities, with the
  assumption that the client can then support the requested capability.
  Not all servers or clients support the same capabilities. See
  https://ircv3.net/ for comprehensive support information.

ENABLING IRCV3 CAPABILITIES IN EGGDROP

  Within eggdrop.toml, many common IRCv3 capabilities can be enabled by
  changing their setting to 1 (true). For example:

    # Request the account-notify capability
    account-notify = 1

    # Request the echo-message capability
    echo-message = 1

  Additional capabilities not explicitly configured can be requested via
  the cap-request setting as a space-separated list:

    cap-request = ["custom-cap-1", "custom-cap-2"]

  For information on what a specific IRCv3 capability does, see
  https://ircv3.net/irc/.

SUPPORTED CAP CAPABILITIES

  Eggdrop supports the following IRCv3 capabilities:

  Core:
  - CAP / CAP 302 (capability negotiation)
  - SASL 3.2 (authentication)

  Channel:
  - account-notify (notify when users authenticate/deauthenticate)
  - account-tag (tag with account name in messages)
  - away-notify (notify when users go away)
  - cap-notify (notify when server capabilities change)
  - chghost (notify when user's host changes)
  - echo-message (server echoes client's own messages)
  - extended-join (include account name in JOIN messages)
  - invite-notify (notify of INVITE commands)
  - message-tags (support for message tags)
  - Monitor (watch specific nicknames for online/offline changes)
  - server-time (include timestamp in messages)
  - setname (notify when user's real name changes)
  - userhost-in-names (include userhost in NAMES list)
  - typing (notify when user is typing)

IMPORTANT NOTES

Echo-message

  Enabling echo-message causes Eggdrop to see and trigger on its own
  messages. This may cause unintended behavior with some scripts if
  they trigger on PUB/PUBM events. Review your scripts before enabling
  this capability on servers that support it.

Userhost-in-names

  Enabling userhost-in-names causes Eggdrop to mark a channel's userlist
  as synchronized upon receiving the NAMES list after joining, rather
  than waiting for a full WHO listing. This optimization is only safe if
  the server disables WHO queries (which is why userhost-in-names is
  typically enabled).

  Enable this capability only on servers that actually disable WHO
  queries to avoid unintended synchronization behavior.

ACCOUNT TRACKING

  For detailed information on using account tracking features, see
  doc/ACCOUNTS.

  Account tracking requires three capabilities to work properly:
  - extended-join (to see accounts on JOIN)
  - account-notify (to see account changes after JOIN)
  - WHOX (to populate accounts when bot joins a channel)

CHECKING CAPABILITY STATUS

  While Eggdrop is running, join the partyline and type:

    .status

  If all required capabilities are enabled on the server, you'll see:

    Loaded module information:
      Account tracking: Enabled

  If some capabilities are missing, you'll see:

    Loaded module information:
      Account tracking: Best-effort (Missing capabilities: extended-join)

  For more detailed capability information:

    .status all

CHECKING SERVER CAPABILITIES

  From the partyline, you can check which capabilities the IRC server
  supports using:

    .tcl cap ls

  This displays the list of capabilities the server advertises. If you
  don't see a capability you need, your server doesn't support it.

  For WHOX support (used for account tracking):

    .tcl issupport isset WHOX

  Returns 1 if WHOX is supported, 0 otherwise.

  Copyright (C) 2010 - 2025 Eggheads Development Team
