Patching and Contributing to Eggdrop

Patching Eggdrop

  Eggdrop is an open source project that depends on contributions from
  users like you. If you come across a feature you'd like to see
  implemented, find a bug, or think the documentation could be clearer,
  you can open an issue on GitHub to discuss your ideas and then submit
  a Pull Request to implement it.

SUBMITTING A PATCH VIA GITHUB

  To create and submit a patch via GitHub:

  1. Fork the eggdrop repository:

     Visit https://github.com/eggheads/eggdrop and click the fork
     button. Follow the directions provided to configure your local
     clone.

  2. Create a new branch for your changes:

       git checkout -b <DescriptiveBranchName>

     For example:

       git checkout -b fix-ipv6-crash
       git checkout -b feature-better-logging

  3. Make your changes and test them thoroughly:

       meson setup builddir
       ninja -C builddir
       # Test your changes before committing

  4. Commit your changes with a clear, descriptive message:

       git add <files>
       git commit -m "brief description of change

       Longer explanation if needed. Reference issue #123 if applicable."

  5. Push your changes to your GitHub fork:

       git push origin <DescriptiveBranchName>

  6. Create a Pull Request:

     Visit your GitHub fork and click the "Compare & pull request"
     button. Select the appropriate branches (usually
     eggheads/eggdrop:develop and your-user/eggdrop:your-branch-name).

  7. Fill in the Pull Request template and submit.

  8. Pour yourself a cold one and bask in the warm feeling of
     contributing to the open source community! Karma++!

CREATING A PATCH FILE (ALTERNATIVE METHOD)

  If you prefer to create a patch file instead of using GitHub:

  1. Make your changes in a clean checkout of Eggdrop.

  2. Create a patch file:

       git diff > my-fix.patch

  3. Email the patch file to: bugs@eggheads.org

  Make sure your patch:
    - Applies cleanly to the develop branch
    - Does not introduce unnecessary whitespace changes
    - Includes a clear description of what it fixes or adds
    - Is accompanied by any relevant test cases

COMMIT MESSAGE FORMAT

  Follow this format for commit messages:

    <type>: <brief description>

    <optional longer explanation>

  Where <type> is one of:
    - feat: A new feature
    - fix: A bug fix
    - refactor: Code refactoring without feature/fix changes
    - docs: Documentation updates
    - test: Test additions or fixes
    - chore: Build system, dependency, or tooling changes
    - perf: Performance improvements

  Examples:

    fix: prevent crash on invalid IPv6 address
    refactor: simplify botnet handshake logic
    feat: add support for SASL SCRAM-SHA-512
    docs: update TLS configuration examples

PULL REQUEST GUIDELINES

  To increase the likelihood your PR will be merged:

  1. Make sure your PR addresses a single concern or feature.

  2. Include tests for new functionality.

  3. Update documentation if your change affects user-visible behavior.

  4. Ensure all tests pass:

       meson test -C builddir

  5. Check for compiler warnings:

       ninja -C builddir
       # Fix any warnings

  6. Keep your commits clean and atomic (one logical change per commit).

  7. Reference related issues in your PR description:

       Fixes #123
       Related to #456

  Copyright (C) 1999 - 2025 Eggheads Development Team
