Encryption and Hashing

Encryption and Hashing in Eggdrop

  Eggdrop 1.9.0 introduced PBKDF2, a modern cryptographic hashing
  algorithm for protecting passwords stored in the userfile. PBKDF2 is
  the default password hashing method in Eggdrop 1.10.

BACKGROUND

  Prior to Eggdrop 1.9.0, the blowfish module was used for password
  hashing. While blowfish is still secure, PBKDF2 (Password-based Key
  Derivation Function 2) is a more modern and widely-adopted standard.

  PBKDF2 uses a password and salt value to create a password hash. The
  salt ensures that identical passwords produce different hashes,
  making rainbow table attacks infeasible. This process is one-way,
  meaning hashes cannot be reversed and are safe for permanent storage.

  Hash algorithms (SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512) are bundled via opssl,
  Eggdrop's custom TLS library. No external cryptography library is
  needed.

  Key improvements of PBKDF2 over blowfish:

    - Modern, widely-reviewed standard
    - Support for multiple hash algorithms (SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512)
    - Maximum password length increased from 15 to 30 characters
    - Configurable iteration rounds for future-proofing
    - Botnet passwords now 30 characters (previously limited to 16)

USAGE MODES

  There are two ways to use PBKDF2 in Eggdrop: Hybrid Configuration
  (recommended for existing bots) and Solo Configuration (recommended
  for new installations).

Hybrid Configuration

  With hybrid configuration, Eggdrop runs both the blowfish and pbkdf2
  modules concurrently. This allows gradual migration of existing
  passwords:

    1. Existing users log in with their blowfish-hashed password
    2. Upon first successful login, their password is automatically
       rehashed with PBKDF2
    3. All future logins use the PBKDF2 hash

  To enable hybrid configuration:

    1. BACK UP YOUR USERFILE (the file ending in .user)

    2. Ensure the config file includes both:

         loadmodule blowfish
         loadmodule pbkdf2

    3. Start Eggdrop

    4. Have users log in normally. Their passwords will be
       automatically upgraded to PBKDF2 on their first login.

Solo Configuration

  With solo configuration, Eggdrop runs only the pbkdf2 module. New
  passwords must be set for all users, making it suitable only for new
  bot installations.

  To enable solo configuration:

    1. BACK UP YOUR USERFILE

    2. Comment out or remove the blowfish module:

         # loadmodule blowfish

    3. Ensure pbkdf2 is uncommented:

         loadmodule pbkdf2

    4. Start Eggdrop

    5. All users must set new passwords via:

         .chpass <newpassword>   (partyline)
         /msg bot PASS <password> (IRC)

  SECURITY NOTE: Do not use solo configuration to migrate an existing
  userfile without backing up users first. Any user matching a hostmask
  but without a set PBKDF2 password can set the password and hijack that
  account.

PBKDF2 CONFIGURATION

  In eggdrop.toml, the following settings control PBKDF2 behavior:

    [pbkdf2]
    method = "SHA256"      # hash algorithm: SHA256, SHA384, SHA512
    rounds = 100000        # iteration rounds (higher = slower but
                           # more future-proof)

  Higher rounds values take longer to compute, making the hashes more
  resistant to brute-force attacks as hardware becomes faster. The
  default of 100,000 rounds is recommended.

BOTNET COMPATIBILITY

  When linking bots in a botnet, both bots must use the same hashing
  module for authentication. If the hub uses PBKDF2, all leaf bots must
  also have PBKDF2 loaded.

TCL INTERFACE

  The PBKDF2 module adds the 'encpass2' command to the Tcl library.
  This command hashes a string using PBKDF2 and returns a hash in the
  format:

    $<method>$rounds=<rounds>$<salt>$<hash>

  Where:
    - method: the hash algorithm (SHA256, SHA384, or SHA512)
    - rounds: number of iterations
    - salt: random value used during hashing
    - hash: the resulting password hash

  Example:

    set hashed [encpass2 "mypassword"]
    # Returns something like:
    # $SHA256$rounds=100000$ABC123DEF456$hash_value_here

  Copyright (C) 2000 - 2025 Eggheads Development Team
