TLS Support

TLS Support in Eggdrop

  Eggdrop supports TLS (Transport Layer Security) versions 1.2 and 1.3.
  TLS is provided by opssl, a custom bundled TLS library. No external
  TLS library (such as OpenSSL or wolfSSL) needs to be installed.

INSTALLATION

  TLS support is bundled with Eggdrop in the subprojects/opssl/
  directory and is built automatically as part of the normal Meson
  build process:

    meson setup builddir
    ninja -C builddir

  TLS is enabled by default. To disable TLS support, use:

    meson setup builddir -Dtls=disabled

USAGE

  As of v1.9.0, TLS support must be requested explicitly for botnet
  links. To create a TLS-enabled listening port or connect to a
  TLS-enabled port, you must prefix the port with a plus sign (+). If a
  port number could normally be omitted as part of a command syntax, it
  must be included (and prefixed) to enable TLS.

  Scripts can also upgrade a regular plaintext connection to TLS via
  STARTTLS using the starttls Tcl command.

IRC CONNECTIONS

  To connect to IRC using TLS, specify the port number and prefix it
  with a plus sign:

    .jump irc.server.com +6697

  The same goes for the server list in eggdrop.toml:

    [[servers]]
    host = "irc.libera.chat"
    port = "+6697"

  Some NickServ services allow you to authenticate with a certificate.
  Eggdrop will use the certificate pair specified in ssl-privatekey and
  ssl-certificate for authentication.

BOTNET CONNECTIONS

  Eggdrop can use TLS connections to protect botnet links if compiled
  with TLS support. As of version 1.9.0, only raw TLS sockets are used
  to protect a connection. By prefixing a listen port in the Eggdrop
  configuration with a plus (+), that specifies that port as a
  TLS-enabled port, and will only accept TLS connections (no plain text
  connections will be allowed).

  Example topology:

    Leaf bot port        Hub bot listen port    Connection type
    -----------------------------------------------------------
    port                 listen port            plain, upgradable to TLS
    +port                listen +port           TLS
    port                 listen +port           fails (hub requires TLS)
    +port                listen port            fails (leaf requires TLS)

  In short:
    - A bot configured to connect to +port can only connect to a hub
      listening on +port.
    - A bot configured to connect to port can only connect to a hub
      listening on port.

  If TLS negotiation fails, the connection is deliberately aborted and
  no clear text is ever sent by the TLS-requiring party.

  Eggdrop can also upgrade a plaintext connection using the starttls
  Tcl command. To use this, a plaintext connection is first made to a
  non-TLS port, then the starttls command is issued to upgrade that
  link to TLS. In Eggdrop 1.8 series, all botnet connections
  automatically attempted STARTTLS. As such, if a 1.8 Eggdrop connects
  to a plain listening port on a 1.9+ Eggdrop, it will automatically
  attempt to upgrade the link to TLS.

SECURE DCC

  Eggdrop supports the SDCC protocol, allowing you to establish DCC
  chat and file transfers over TLS. For example:

    /ctcp bot schat

  Currently, only KVIrc supports SDCC among IRC clients. For information
  on initiating secure DCC chat from KVIrc, consult the KVIrc
  documentation.

SCRIPT CONNECTIONS

  Scripts can open or connect to TLS ports the usual way by specifying
  the port with a plus sign:

    set fd [socket host +6697]

  Alternatively, the connection could be established as plaintext and
  later upgraded with the starttls Tcl command. Note that the other
  side should also upgrade to TLS at the same time—synchronization is
  the script's responsibility, not Eggdrop's.

CERTIFICATES AND AUTHENTICATION

  You need a private key and a digital certificate whenever your bot
  will act as a server in a connection (such as hub bots or TLS
  listening ports).

  To generate a key and certificate, run after installation:

    make sslcert

  This generates a 4096-bit private key (eggdrop.key) and a certificate
  (eggdrop.crt) after you provide the required information via prompts.

  For non-interactive generation (useful for scripted deployment):

    make sslsilent

  User certificates

  To authenticate with a certificate instead of a password:

  1. Create a certificate for yourself:

       openssl req -new -x509 -nodes -keyout my.key -out my.crt

     (The openssl command-line tool is separate from the bundled opssl
     library. Install it via your OS package manager if needed.)

  2. Enable certificate authentication in eggdrop.toml:

       ssl-cert-auth = 1

  3. Connect to the bot via TLS and register your certificate:

       .fprint +

  To manually set a certificate fingerprint (useful for automation):

       .fprint SHA256-FINGERPRINT

  To connect from the command line using your key/cert:

    openssl s_client -cert my.crt -key my.key -connect host:sslport

TLS CONFIGURATION SETTINGS

  The following settings are available in eggdrop.toml:

  ssl-privatekey (string)

    File containing Eggdrop's private key. Required for TLS-enabled
    listening ports.

  ssl-certificate (string)

    File containing Eggdrop's TLS certificate. Required for TLS-enabled
    listening ports.

  ssl-verify-depth (integer)

    Maximum verification depth when checking certificate validity.
    Determines the maximum certificate chain length to allow. Default: 9

  ssl-capath (string)

    Directory containing certificate authority certificates (PEM format).
    Used for certificate verification.

  ssl-cafile (string)

    File containing certificate authority certificates (PEM format).
    Used for certificate verification. Can be used alongside ssl-capath.

  ssl-ciphers (string)

    Comma-separated list of ciphers (in order of preference) allowed
    for use with TLS. If not set, sensible defaults are used.

  ssl-cert-auth (integer)

    Enable or disable certificate authentication:
      0 - disabled
      1 - optional (if fingerprint matches, access granted; otherwise
          password authentication)
      2 - required (certificate with matching fingerprint and UID field
          required)

  ssl-verify-dcc (integer)
  ssl-verify-bots (integer)
  ssl-verify-server (integer)
  ssl-verify-clients (integer)

    Control TLS certificate verification. Possible values:
      0 - no verification
      1 - full verification
      2+ - specific exceptions (e.g., allow self-signed or expired certs)

    See eggdrop.toml or the HTML documentation for full details.

  Copyright (C) 2010 - 2025 Eggheads Development Team
