Eggdrop Tricks and Advanced Tips

Advanced Tips

  Here are some advanced tips and tricks that might not be documented
  elsewhere, along with configuration tweaks for better performance and
  functionality.

RENAMING COMMANDS

  You can rename a built-in partyline command by binding over it. To
  rename '.status' to '.report', you'd do:

    unbind dcc - status *dcc:status
    bind dcc m report *dcc:status

  The first line removes the built-in binding on '.status', and the
  second line binds '.report' to the built-in status function.

  You can rename most DCC commands this way, as long as you know the
  internal function name (which usually matches the command name).

KEEPING LOGS

  If you don't want your logfiles to be deleted after two days and don't
  want the bot to create a new logfile each new day, set these options
  in eggdrop.toml:

    keep-all-logs = false
    switch-logfiles-at = 2500

  This makes Eggdrop keep one logfile continuously. Note: this is not
  recommended on high-traffic channels as the logfile can grow very
  large.

  To keep logs indefinitely while still rotating daily, set:

    keep-all-logs = true
    switch-logfiles-at = 0

SELF-LOGGING

  Because of how traditional IRC works, Eggdrop doesn't capture its own
  outgoing messages to the logfile. However, if your IRC server supports
  the IRCv3 capability "echo-message", you can enable it in eggdrop.toml:

    cap-request = ["echo-message"]

  This causes the server to send Eggdrop's public messages back to the
  bot, allowing those messages to be logged like any other message.

MODIFYING DEFAULT STRINGS

  You can modify Eggdrop's output in the partyline, kick messages, and
  other text by editing the language file located at:

    <eggdrop-dir>/lang/core.english.lang

  This file contains all the default message strings. Simply edit the
  strings you want to change. After editing, restart the bot for changes
  to take effect.

MODULARIZING YOUR CONFIG FILE

  You can export parts of your config file to separate files and source
  them. For example, if you have several config files which differ only
  by nickname and servers, you can export them to separate files:

    # Main config file
    set mybot "BotName"
    source "common-settings.toml"
    source "servers.toml"

  This way, you only need to edit the small files instead of the large
  main config file. This technique is also useful for maintaining
  consistent channel settings across a botnet.

VARIABLES IN YOUR CONFIG

  Since the Tcl interpreter can read the config file, you can use Tcl
  variables. For example:

    set mybot "MyBot"
    set userfile "$mybot.user"
    set chanfile "$mybot.chan"

  This allows you to define values once and reuse them, making config
  maintenance easier.

IMPROVING PERFORMANCE

  For high-traffic bots, consider these settings in eggdrop.toml:

    # Increase the userfile save frequency (seconds)
    save-userfile-every = 300

    # Increase the channel file save frequency (seconds)
    save-chanfile-every = 300

    # Reduce the frequency of writing backups
    # (they're time-consuming on large userfiles)

  Building Eggdrop with optimization flags can also improve performance:

    meson setup builddir -Dbuildtype=release

  This removes debugging symbols and enables compiler optimizations.

DEBUGGING SCRIPT ISSUES

  If you're debugging a Tcl script, you can enable Tcl tracing:

    set tcl_traceExec 1

  Add this to your config file to see Tcl commands being executed. This
  can help identify which commands are causing issues. Remove it once
  you've identified the problem, as it has a performance impact.

  For more detailed debugging, enable the -g flag during compilation:

    meson setup builddir -Dbuildtype=debug

  This includes debugging symbols that help in post-mortem analysis of
  crashes. See doc/BUG-REPORT for more information.

MONITORING MEMORY USAGE

  For long-running bots, monitor memory usage with:

    .status memory

  On the partyline (if memory tracking is compiled in). This shows
  memory allocated to various internal structures.

  If memory usage grows continuously, there might be a memory leak. Open
  an issue at https://github.com/eggheads/eggdrop/issues with memory
  usage information.

COPYRIGHT

  Copyright (C) 1999 - 2025 Eggheads Development Team
